Katie Kauppi

April 25

Worldwide, 99% of maternal deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries. The majority of these deaths occur in the Sub-Saharan Africa region, and most of the fatalities could be easily prevented with the intervention of skilled healthcare professionals. Ailments like hemorrhages and infections that are deadly to mothers in Africa rarely take the lives of mothers in more developed countries around the world. When comparing maps of African population distribution and the distribution of healthcare facilities within the country, the maps seem to line up, indicating that the presence of healthcare facilities is not actually the problem. This invites the question: Why is the prevalence of healthcare facilities not reducing maternal mortality rates? And as a follow up question, what factors contribute to the ineffectiveness of existing healthcare facilities? I hypothesize that the location of hospitals specifically is more important for saving lives than the abundance of non-hospitals that are present in the countries with the highest maternal mortality rates. Additionally, many of the healthcare services may be too expensive for many mothers to be able to afford the care they need. To address this problem, I intend to utilize an artificial neural network to map the location of women of childbearing age (15-49) in Sub-Saharan Africa and identify their distances to a hospital and their incomes. The research should be targeted at the countries where the rates are the highest: Sierra Leone, Chad, and South Sudan. The current literature does not explore the locations of mothers in these countries, but it also does not identify whether or not healthcare services are too costly for many mothers. I would also use a Bayesian population growth model to supplement the artificial neural network to predict these values for each of the next ten years. After the completion of the year-long research period, I would suggest that aid be directed to the areas that are lacking hospitals, but also direct funding to areas where cost is the main reason prohibiting proper healthcare. This should be over a ten year period, and each year the aid should be altered to fit the new models. In addition to recalculating the maternal mortality rates to identify potential positive change, a microcensus survey should be administered each year asking mothers, families, and healthcare workers to rate the effectiveness of the aid in their facilities.
